---
layout: post
categories: posts
title: Machine Learning with Differential Privacy
featured-image: /images/EHRVAL.jpg
tags: [Differential Privacy, Machine Learning, DigitalHealth]
date-string: January 2025
---



## Machine Learning with Differential Privacy
What if [Differential Privacy](https://kamran-afzali.github.io/posts/2024-09-28/smote_blog.html) (DP) could enhance the generalization of machine learning models, this is a counterintuitive yet well-documented phenomenon. As Machine learning (ML) systems increasingly rely on large and sensitive datasets, differential privacy offers a robust framework to address these concerns by ensuring that the inclusion or exclusion of a single data point does not significantly affect the outcome of an analysis. Here we look at the integration of differential privacy in machine learning, highlighting examples from the R package **`DPpack`**.

As we mentioned in an earler [post](https://kamran-afzali.github.io/posts/2024-09-28/smote_blog.html), Differential privacy is a mathematical framework that provides strong privacy guarantees by adding noise to the data or the analysis process. This noise ensures that the output of a computation does not reveal sensitive information about any individual in the dataset. The essence of differential privacy is that it limits what an adversary can learn about any individual, even with access to auxiliary information. Machine learning models often require large amounts of data for training and this data can contain sensitive information about individuals, such as medical records, financial transactions, or personal identifiers. Without adequate privacy protections, there is a risk that these models leak private information. Differential Privacy addresses this challenge by incorporating noise into **either the data or the learning process**, ensuring that the model's outputs do not compromise individual privacy. In the context of machine learning, DP can be applied at various stages. Differential privacy can be applied to the dataset before training by adding noise to the data. This ensures that individual data points are obfuscated, but the overall patterns in the data remain intact for model learning. Likewise, during the training phase, DP techniques can be used to add noise to the gradients or weights, making it difficult to reverse-engineer sensitive data from the model parameters. Finally, differential privacy can be applied to the model outputs, such as predictions or published results, ensuring that these outputs do not reveal sensitive information. More specifically, two common approaches to DPML are **Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD):** this method adds noise to the gradients during the training process, ensuring that the updates to the model parameters do not compromise individual privacy. DP-SGD can be integrated into existing ML frameworks like TensorFlow and PyTorch and **Model Agnostic Private Learning:** this approach involves training multiple models on different subsets of data and using a differentially private mechanism to aggregate their predictions. This aggregation prevents any single model from revealing private information. The `DPpack` package in R provides practical tools for implementing differential privacy in various statistical and machine learning tasks, making it accessible for researchers and practitioners to adopt these privacy-preserving techniques. 

### **Theoretical and Empirical Evidence**

Research has shown that differential privacy improves generalization of ML models, the privacy-preserving mechanisms ensure that the model is not overly sensitive to any single data point, reducing the risk of overfitting. As a result, if a differentially private learning algorithm has good training accuracy, it is also likely to achieve good test accuracy. This connection between privacy and generalization is supported by theoretical work indicating that differential privacy can improve generalization "for free" due to its regularizing effect. Likewise, empirical studies, such as those by [Abadi et al. (2016)](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2976749.2978318?casa_token=mEZciYIx_CIAAAAA:cOf3PihNarGHgOJ88eEl8JyI87fEsRY4q0QxLC3pxVPEEzZ8ZkHSPoT3f4AkhbP4yVmts-vc7KBI5Q), have demonstrated that differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) can lead to improved generalization performance. These studies found that while the introduction of noise might reduce accuracy slightly, the gap between training and testing accuracy tends to be smaller, indicating better generalization. This is particularly evident in scenarios with smaller privacy budgets, where the noise has a more pronounced regularizing effect.

However, the implementation of differential privacy in machine learning has challenges such as the trade-off between privacy and accuracy. The introduction of noise, while essential for maintaining privacy, can also degrade the performance of the model, particularly when the privacy budget, often represented by the parameter epsilon, is small. A smaller privacy budget means stronger privacy guarantees but at the cost of adding more noise, which can obscure the underlying data patterns and reduce the model’s ability to make accurate predictions. Balancing this trade-off is a critical challenge in the deployment of differentially private machine learning models. Data scientists should carefully calibrate the amount of noise added to ensure that the model remains both private and useful, a delicate balance that requires a deep understanding of both the underlying data and the privacy mechanisms being employed.

The integration of differential privacy into machine learning moves us toward building more secure and trustworthy AI systems, which is essential as these technologies continue to affect all aspects of our society. As privacy concerns become increasingly present, particularly with the rise of data-driven decision-making in sensitive areas such as digital health, the adoption of differentially private machine learning techniques is likely to grow. Organizations will need to balance the benefits of data-driven insights with the ethical and legal obligations to protect individual privacy.  The `DPpack` package in R is an example of how differential privacy can be practically implemented in machine learning workflows and provides tools for differentially private statistical functions and machine learning algorithms. The package allows practitioners to build privacy-preserving models without needing to delve deeply into the mathematical intricacies of differential privacy. 

### **Examples from the R Package `DPpack`**

The `DPpack` R package provides tools for implementing differentially private statistical analyses and machine learning models, includeing implementations of machine learning algorithms such as regression and support vector machines (SVM) with differential privacy guarantees. Below is the code implementing a differentially private linear regression. 

```r
n <- 500
X <- data.frame(X1=rnorm(n, mean=0, sd=0.3),X2=rnorm(n, mean=0, sd=0.3),X3=rnorm(n, mean=0, sd=0.3))
true.theta <- c(-.3,.5,.8,.2) # First element is bias term
p <- length(true.theta)
y <- true.theta[1] + as.matrix(X)%*%true.theta[2:p] + stats::rnorm(n=n,sd=.1)
summary(y)
```

**Generate Data:**

   - `n <- 500` sets the number of data points to 500.
   - `X` creates a data frame with 3 features (`X1`, `X2`, `X3`), each generated as random numbers from a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 0.3.

**Define the True Coefficients:**

   - `true.theta` contains the true coefficients for the linear regression model, including the bias term `-0.3`. The other coefficients are for `X1`, `X2`, and `X3`.
   - `p` holds the number of coefficients (4 in this case, including the bias term).

**Generate Response Variable:**

   - `y` is the response variable (target). It is generated using the linear equation `y = bias + X1*0.5 + X2*0.8 + X3*0.2 + noise`, where noise is added using a normal distribution with a small standard deviation of 0.1 to simulate real-world variance.
   - The `summary(y)` function provides a summary of the generated `y` values, such as min, max, median, etc.

```r
regularizer <- 'l2' # Alternatively, function(coeff) coeff%*%coeff/2
eps <- 10
delta <- 0 # Indicates to use pure eps-DP
gamma <- 0
regularizer.gr <- function(coeff) coeff

lrdp <- LinearRegressionDP$new('l2', eps, delta, gamma, regularizer.gr)
```


**Setup Differential Privacy Parameters:**

   - `regularizer <- 'l2'`: Specifies that L2 regularization (a method to prevent overfitting by penalizing large coefficients) will be used.
   - `eps <- 10`: Sets the privacy budget (epsilon), which controls the level of privacy. A larger epsilon means less privacy (more accuracy), while a smaller epsilon means stronger privacy (more noise added).
   - `delta <- 0`: Indicates that pure epsilon-DP is being used, which is a strict privacy guarantee.
   - `gamma <- 0`: Another parameter related to regularization (in this case, not actively used).
   - `regularizer.gr <- function(coeff) coeff`: Defines a gradient function for the regularizer.

**Create the Differentially Private Linear Regression Object:**

   - `lrdp` creates an instance of the `LinearRegressionDP` class, which is used to perform differentially private linear regression with L2 regularization, the specified epsilon, delta, and the regularization gradient function.

```r
upper.bounds <- c(1,1,1, 2) # Bounds for X and y
lower.bounds <- c(-1,-1,-1,-2) # Bounds for X and y
lrdp$fit(X, y, upper.bounds, lower.bounds, add.bias=TRUE)
lrdp$coeff # Gets private coefficients
```

**Fit the Model and retrieve the Private Coefficients:**

   - `upper.bounds` and `lower.bounds` specify the range within which the features (`X1`, `X2`, `X3`) and response variable (`y`) happen to be. This bounding is important for differential privacy to ensure that the added noise is properly calibrated.
   - `lrdp$fit(X, y, upper.bounds, lower.bounds, add.bias=TRUE)` fits the differentially private linear regression model to the data. The `add.bias=TRUE` flag indicates that the bias term is included in the model.
   - `lrdp$coeff` retrieves the differentially private coefficients of the regression model, which have been trained using the DP mechanism.

### **Conclusion**

Machine learning with differential privacy can handel sensitive data while still performing predictive modeling by introducing noise at various stages of the machine learning process, from data preprocessing to generating outputs. The `DPpack` R package serves as a tool for implementing these privacy-preserving techniques in machine learning, offering practical methods for differentially private regression, support vector machines, and other algorithms without requiring deep knowledge of the mathematical underpinnings of DP. One of the advantages of differential privacy in machine learning is its ability to improve generalization, with the noise introduced through differential privacy acting as a regularizer, preventing models from overfitting to the training data and enabling better performance on unseen datasets. This effect has been supported by both theoretical research and empirical studies, which demonstrate that models trained with differential privacy often show improved test accuracy despite the slight reduction in training accuracy. However,the balance between privacy and accuracy is delicate, as stronger privacy guarantees (i.e., a smaller privacy budget) require more noise to be added, which can obscure the underlying data patterns and decrease the model’s predictive accuracy. The example provided from the `DPpack` R package shows the application of differential privacy to real-world machine learning tasks, such as linear regression. As the importance of data privacy continues to grow, particularly with the increasing sensitivity from regulatory institutions, adopting such privacy-preserving techniques will be essential for organizations that rely on machine learning for decision-making. Looking ahead, several follow-up questions should be considered. For instance, how can we further optimize the balance between model accuracy and privacy? What innovations in differential privacy mechanisms could make it easier to apply in more complex machine learning models like deep learning networks? Additionally, how can organizations ensure that they are transparently communicating the use of differential privacy to stakeholders, particularly when dealing with highly sensitive data? These are some of the important questions to consider as the field of machine learning with differential privacy continues to evolve.

### References

- Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B., Mironov, I., Talwar, K., & Zhang, L. (2016, October). [Deep learning with differential privacy](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2976749.2978318?casa_token=mEZciYIx_CIAAAAA:cOf3PihNarGHgOJ88eEl8JyI87fEsRY4q0QxLC3pxVPEEzZ8ZkHSPoT3f4AkhbP4yVmts-vc7KBI5Q).
- [Differential privacy II: machine learning and data generation](https://www.borealisai.com/research-blogs/tutorial-13-differential-privacy-ii-machine-learning-and-data-generation/)
- [How to DP-fy ML: A Practical Guide to Machine Learning with Differential Privacy](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.00654.pdf)
- [How to deploy machine learning with differential privacy?](https://differentialprivacy.org/how-to-deploy-ml-with-dp/)
- [Differential privacy in deep learning: Privacy and beyond](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167739X23002315)
- [How to deploy machine learning with differential privacy](https://www.nist.gov/blogs/cybersecurity-insights/how-deploy-machine-learning-differential-privacy)
- [Can a Model Be Differentially Private and Fair?](https://pair.withgoogle.com/explorables/private-and-fair/)
- [Machine Learning and differential privacy: overview](https://2021.ai/machine-learning-differential-privacy-overview/)
- [Package ‘DPpack’](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/DPpack/DPpack.pdf)
