
FSL (the FMRIB Software Library) is a comprehensive library of analysis tools for functional, structural and diffusion MRI brain imaging data, written mainly by members of the Analysis Group, FMRIB, Oxford. For this NeuroImage special issue on “20 years of fMRI” we have been asked to write about the history, developments and current status of FSL. We also include some descriptions of parts of FSL that are not well covered in the existing literature. We hope that some of this content might be of interest to users of FSL, and also maybe to new research groups considering creating, releasing and supporting new software packages for brain image analysis.

FSL divides into three main areas, related to functional, diffusion and structural image analysis. There are over 230 individual com- mand line tools (approximately 140 scripts and 90 compiled C++ programs — including 50 small/flexible tools in the “fslutils” set) plus 23 GUIs, making it very flexible but rather formidable to the first-time user. However, there are only a handful of major tools that most people use directly, as shown in Table 1, which gives a rough idea of the current scope of FSL.

As mentioned above, the GUIs provide a simple interface and pipe- line for the various underlying command-line tools. It is always pos- sible to replicate an analysis that was done with a GUI using only command-line tools, and this is made easier by the existence of a command log file that is output by the GUI. This makes custom-scripting relatively easy, including parallelising tasks on a computing cluster, although distributing jobs over a cluster is already automatically handled by some of the “larger” FSL GUIs (e.g., FEAT, FDT).

Some of these tools have existed for a long time (e.g., FEAT, BET, FLIRT) while others are relatively new (e.g., FABBER, TBSS, FSLVBM). At times there have been “delays” before including certain functional- ity that might arguably have appeared earlier, for example nonlinear registration and VBM-like functionality; we now describe a little of the relevant history.




We present the package fslr, a set of R functions that interface with FSL (FMRIB Software Library), a commonly-used open-source software package for processing and analyzing neuroimaging data. The fslr package performs operations on ‘nifti’ image objects in R using command-line functions from FSL, and returns R objects back to the user. fslr allows users to develop image processing and analysis pipelines based on FSL functionality while interfacing with the functionality provided by R. We present an example of the analysis of structural magnetic resonance images, which demonstrates how R users can leverage the functionality of FSL without switching to shell commands.

Fundamental functionality that FSL and other imaging software provide is not currently implemented in R. In particular, this includes algorithms for performing slice-time correction, motion correction, brain extraction, tissue- class segmentation, bias-field correction, co-registration, and normalization. This lack of functionality is currently hindering R users from performing complete analysis of image data within R. Instead of re-implementing FSL functions in R, we propose a user-friendly interface between R and FSL that preserves all the functionality of FSL, while retaining the advantages of using R. This will allow R users to implement complete imaging pipelines without necessarily learning software-specific syntax.
The fslr package relies heavily on the oro.nifti (Whitcher et al., 2011) package implementation of images (referred to as ‘nifti’ objects) that are in the Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) format, as well as other common image formats such as ANALYZE. oro.nifti also provides useful functions for plotting and manipulating images. fslr expands on the oro.nifti package by providing additional functions for manipulation of ‘nifti’ objects.


# References

[FSL Course Video Lectures 2021](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ExL6J4BIeo&list=PLvgasosJnUVl_bt8VbERUyCLU93OG31h_)

[FSL](https://open.win.ox.ac.uk/pages/fslcourse/website/online_materials.html)

[FSL](https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fslcourse/lectures/intro.pdf)

[FSL](https://open.win.ox.ac.uk/pages/fslcourse/website/online_materials.html)

[fslr: Connecting the FSL Software with R](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4911193/pdf/nihms-792376.pdf)

[FSL Paper](https://pdf.sciencedirectassets.com/272508/1-s2.0-S1053811912X00119/1-s2.0-S1053811911010603/main.pdf?X-Amz-Security-Token=IQoJb3JpZ2luX2VjEP7%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2F%2FwEaCXVzLWVhc3QtMSJHMEUCIBZ7MKEXrri7SO%2FUC6a0OI1hQwmQXJ%2Fmn%2FmmJRcvkPzKAiEArbyUN7rgneoNXFX4fWxSlX1xXxEVw0RKEqw7YpZyjo8q0gQIRxAFGgwwNTkwMDM1NDY4NjUiDCAr2sAbUILLxNGqliqvBE%2BFWp07BWc9nwT0hV%2FYTyUTE0nmqEobsB6QURk7pWojxHnWxSsOrvnk%2FMHoNt69X75pfmAuIDzjhz6yRBt%2F8yh6VLbPc8QqbAUvzy5VTOcxDAh0x5B2%2FW6CMyhLK9B12aqOqK%2BnAwf6TEQDHKM%2FMnJofOwJIyTy5RJ6%2FWuwkmgZqtsm%2FD7T6iwG5G0DjfvucfgWziJxXki87TIamX5bW7f%2FYgLfYlaBspEuIB1sOQXaoBaQ0xlCA1thOXmZOlRVGJ2KdiPuZbOm9UB8lU29YRp3DUQre%2Fm3%2FnzRedoCxS9bKaAylMrO0buVsUn1kKB7Rma2LRvLnXBU4pkrvnj%2BdUaaZKC3ZOQm9wxSH6I1ZTSuilR0k27NVAYFTn%2FHpDWu%2FReoR7qduCJ7Lp8IdDNxnlypboUgNKLKZFMytwmtIig6PrDx06P0hzFyTx5JrD4V0WmiFHC6kSqyguqaEcAAvLBv6kznOg3f8Jgfqxk%2B3H6rPzRzE8YPMV3BuOT0%2FW74gLgM1S8%2FXq380IXxDdoJk5VafR62AUNIet4pB2Eb7%2B3ze8HlZEApJmwXR6D7eCdeZmOHot97T2J18bcnnni60g0XMBb%2FlPk3jkvYQDyz9kCcg7B56BZuGvj0t70%2Fnikq%2B0sb4avSd6YeHpxXWcL7rT3AHNRL62kpD%2Bx2ziMLGDu2NiS7VVkmTLOGHwxQnDy5eUfsFiY2%2FMxB97P6vcQ20hrfDW1RUe3XxbqmUQNlT6cwganllgY6qQEmwdZS8wKKOO0xX%2FBPlxcmU39utUibQui2X3v1jGxAMfwWNNgJLlH0vX%2FpVZTqIh8e4WuQ6DffRjq3sh5L6pJgXKwW2Rl5JdbD1msyclywL5a0J4jx68SJ9zZa74Y0xnJUrKJ0STPl3%2FiGUSNYFYEW7HnsaJuPdiyjzkYtEFSMc%2FKEUM4WbFFUBSuMrh%2BRGRbZq9aE8CL%2BT2C53uN3CZ5J1P17Tg2vk86L&X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256&X-Amz-Date=20220721T142033Z&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Expires=300&X-Amz-Credential=ASIAQ3PHCVTYTWSMZFGV%2F20220721%2Fus-east-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-Signature=1248d4ea5c26f6ea0457a0f0aa782b504e2a6d72591aa9623c1ed06f1be78ac7&hash=620a8e745bfba1abd2228f71614971ea12d9fd6e8fac5827322880a09e2498ed&host=68042c943591013ac2b2430a89b270f6af2c76d8dfd086a07176afe7c76c2c61&pii=S1053811911010603&tid=spdf-d9ee94e5-ee74-491d-b31b-1dfa79035d78&sid=c834f2a814e09140b719d9992d1e58347199gxrqa&type=client&ua=4d5c02565c50005b0c02&rr=72e493f4ca8e4bd0)
