## Introduction

The brain occupies space, so it is possible to collect data on how it fills space, also called volume data. All the volume data needed to create the complete, 3D image of the brain, recorded at one single timepoint is called a *volume*. The data is measured in voxels, which are like the pixels used to display images on your screen, only in 3D. Each voxel has a specific dimension, with the same dimension from all sides (isotropic). Each voxel contains one value which stands for the average signal measured at the given location. A standard anatomical volume, with an isotropic voxel resolution of 1mm contains almost 17 million voxels, which are arranged in a 3D matrix of 256 x 256 x 256 voxels. 
As the scanner can’t measure the whole volume at once it has to measure portions of the brain sequentially in time. This is done by measuring one plane of the brain (generally the horizontal one) after the other. The resolution of the measured volume data, therefore, depends on the in-plane resolution (the size of the squares in the above image), the number of slices and their thickness (how many layers), and any possible gaps between the layers. The quality of the measured data depends on the resolution and the following parameters:

+ Repetition time (TR): time required to scan one volume

+ Acquisition time (TA): time required to scan one slice. TA = TR - (TR/number of slices)

+ field of view (FOV): defines the extent of a slice, e.g. 256mm x 256mm

### Specifics of MRI Data

MRI scanners output their neuroimaging data in a raw data format with which most analysis packages cannot work. DICOM is a common, standardized, raw medical image format. Raw data is saved in k-space format, and it needs to be converted into a format that the analysis packages can use. The most frequent format for newly generated data is called NIfTI. MRI data formats will have an image and a header part. For NifTI format, they are in the same file (.nii-file), whereas in the older Analyze format, they are in separate files (.img and .hdr-file). The image is the actual data and is represented by a 3D matrix that contains a value (e.g. gray value) for each voxel.
The header contains information about the data like voxel dimension, voxel extend in each dimension, number of measured time points, a transformation matrix that places the 3D matrix from the image part in a 3D coordinate system, etc.

### Modalities of MRI Data

There are many different kinds of acquisition techniques. But the most common ones are structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).

#### sMRI (structural MRI)

Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) is a technique for measuring the anatomy of the brain. By measuring the amount of water at a given location, sMRI is capable of acquiring a detailed anatomical picture of our brain. This allows us to accurately distinguish between different types of tissue, such as gray and white matter, with grey matter structures are seen in dark, and the white matter structures in bright colors. Structural images are high-resolution images of the brain that are used as reference images for multiple purposes, such as corregistration, normalization, segmentation, and surface reconstruction. As the anatomy is not supposed to change while the person is in the scanner, a higher resolution can be used for recording anatomical images, with a voxel extent of 0.2 to 1.5mm, depending on the strength of the magnetic field in the scanner, e.g. 1.5T, 3T or 7T. 

#### fMRI (functional MRI)

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a technique for measuring brain activity by detecting the changes in blood oxygenation and blood flow that occur in response to neural activity. Brain needs a lot of energy to sustain its functionality, and increased activity at a location increases the local energy consumption in the form of oxygen (O2) which is carried by the blood. Therefore, increased function results in increased blood flow towards the energy consuming location. Immediately after neural activity the blood oxygen level decreases, known as the initial dip, because of the local energy consumption. This is followed by increased flow of new and oxygen-rich blood towards the energy consuming region. After 4-6 seconds a peak of blood oxygen level is reached. After no further neuronal activation takes place the signal decreases again and typically undershoots, before rising again to the baseline level. The blood oxygen level is exactly what we measure with fMRI. The MRI Scanner is able to measure the changes in the magnetic field caused by the difference in the magnetic susceptibility of oxygenated (diamagnetic) and deoxygenated (paramagnetic) blood. The signal is therefore called the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) response. Because the BOLD signal has to be measured quickly, the resolution of functional images is normally lower (2-4mm) than the resolution of structural images (0.5-1.5mm). But this depends strongly on the strength of the magnetic field in the scanner, e.g. 1.5T, 3T or 7T. In a functional image, the gray matter is seen as bright and the white matter as dark colors, which is the exact opposite to structural images.

##### **fMRI designs**

+ Event-related design
  + Event-related means that stimuli are administered to the subjects in the scanner for a short period. The stimuli are only administered briefly and generally in random order. Stimuli are typically visual, but audible or or other sensible stimuli could also be used. This means that the BOLD response consists of short bursts of activity, which should manifest as peaks.

+ Block design
  + If multiple stimuli of a similar nature are shown in a block, or phase, of 10-30 seconds, that is a block design. Such a design has the advantages that the peak in the BOLD signal is not just attained for a short period but elevated for a longer time, creating a plateau in the graph. This makes it easier to detect an underlying activation increase.

+ Resting-state design
  + Resting-state designs acquire data in the absence of stimulation. Subjects are asked to lay still and rest in the scanner without falling asleep. The goal of such a scan is to record brain activation in the absence of an external task. This is sometimes done to analyze the functional connectivity of the brain.

#### dMRI (diffusion MRI)

Diffusion imaging is done to obtain information about the brain’s white matter connections. There are multiple modalities to record diffusion images, such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), diffusion spectrum imaging (DSI), diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and diffusion functional MRI (DfMRI). By recording the diffusion trajectory of the molecules (usually water) in a given voxel, one can make inferences about the underlying structure in the voxel. For example, if one voxel contains mostly horizontal fiber tracts, the water molecules in this region will mostly move in a horizontal manner, as they can’t move vertically because of this neural barrier. There are many different diffusion measurements, such as mean diffusivity (MD), fractional anisotropy (FA) and Tractography. Each measurement gives different insights into the brain’s neural fiber tracts. Diffusion MRI is a rather new field in MRI and still has some problems with its sensitivity to correctly detect fiber tracts and their underlying orientation. For more about diffusion MRI see the Diffusion MRI Wikipedia page.

### Image processing

Images are used as data in many different contexts. Neuroscience research has also been fascinated with images for almost as long as it has existed as a science. Neuroimaging is all about images and the fundamental type of data that most neuroimaging researchers use are images of brains. In this section, we’ll give a broad introduction to image processing that will survey a wide range of different kinds of operations that you can do with images. Overall, the purpose of this chapter is to develop an intuition for the kind of things that you might think about when you are doing image processing more specifically: image segmentation and image registration. These are particularly common in the analysis of neuroimaging data and a detailed understanding of these operations should serve you well, even if you ultimately use specialized off-the-shelf software tools for these operations, rather than implementing them yourself.

### Images are arrays

Neuroimaging experiments can be represented as Numpy arrays. However, one thing that distinguishes images from other kinds of data is that spatial relationships are crucially important for the analysis of images. That is because neighboring parts of the image usually represent objects that are near each other in the physical world as well. Image-processing algorithms should use these neighborhood relationships. Conversely, in some cases, these neighborhood relationships induce constraints on the operations one can do with the images because we’d like to keep these neighborhood relationships constant even if we put the image through various transformations. 

### Images can have two dimensions or more

We typically think of images as having two dimensions, because when we look at images, we are usually viewing them on a two-dimensional surface: on the screen of a computer or a page. But some kinds of images have more than two dimensions. For example, in most cases where we are analyzing brain images, we are interested in the full three-dimensional image of the brain. This means that brain images are usually (at least) three-dimensional. Again, under our definition of an image, this is fine. So long as the spatial relationships are meaningful and important in the analysis, it is fine that they extend over more than two dimensions.


### Image segmentation 

Here we are going to look at computational tasks that are in common use in neuroimaging data analysis and we are going to demonstrate some solutions to these problems using relatively simple computations. The first is image segmentation. Image segmentation divides the pixels or voxels of an image into different groups. For example, you might divide a neuroimaging dataset into parts that contain the brain itself and parts that are non-brain (e.g., background, skull, etc.). Generally speaking, segmenting an image allows us to know where different objects are in an image and allows us to separately analyze parts of the image that contain particular objects of interest. For example, we don’t want to analyze the voxels that contain parts of the subject’s skull and/or skin that appear as bright lines. We also don’t want to analyze the voxels that are in the ventricles, appearing here as brighter parts of the image. To be able to select only the voxels that are in the brain proper, we need to segment the image into brain and non-brain. There are a few different approaches to this problem.

#### Intensity-based segmentation

The first and simplest approach to segmentation is to use the distribution of pixel intensities as a basis for segmentation For instance, the parts of the image that contain the brain are brighter – have higher intensity values. The parts of the image that contain the background are dark and contain low-intensity values. One way of looking at the intensity values in the image is using a histogram. For this it is enough to use Matplotlib “hist” function, which expects a one-dimensional array as input, so the input is the “flat” representation of the image array, which unfolds the two-dimensional array into a one-dimensional array.

#### Otsu’s method

A classic approach to this problem is now known as “Otsu’s method”, after the Japanese engineer Nobuyuki Otsu, who invented it in the 1970s. The method relies on a straightforward principle: find a threshold that minimizes the variance in pixel intensities within each class of pixels (for example, brain and non-brain). This principle is based on the idea that pixels within each of these segments should be as similar as possible to each other, and as different as possible from the other segment. It also turns out that this is a very effective strategy for many other cases where you would like to separate the background from the foreground (for example, text on a page). This method is looking for a threshold that would minimize the total variance in pixel intensities within each class, or “intraclass variance”. This has two components: The first is the variance of pixel intensities in the background pixels, weighted by the proportion of the image that is in the background. The other is the variance of pixel intensities in the foreground, weighted by the proportion of pixels belonging to the foreground. To find this threshold value, Otsu’s method relies on the following procedure: Calculate the intraclass variance for every possible value of the threshold and find the candidate threshold that corresponds to the minimal intraclass variance. The foreground contribution to the intraclass variance is the variance of the intensities among the foreground pixels. The background contribution to the intraclass variance is the variance of the intensities in the background pixels, multiplied by the number of background pixels (with very similar code for each of these). The intraclass variance is the sum of these two. After running through several candidates, the value stored in the threshold variable will be the value of the candidate that corresponds to the smallest possible intraclass variance.

#### Edge-based segmentation

Threshold-based segmentation assumes that different parts of the image that should belong to different segments should have different distributions of pixel values. In many cases that is true. But this approach does not take advantage of the spatial layout of the image. Another approach to segmentation uses the fact that parts of the image that should belong to different segments are usually separated by edges. What is an edge? Usually, these are contiguous boundaries between parts of the image that look different from each other. These differences can be differences in intensity, but also differences in texture, pattern, and so on. In a sense, finding edges and segmenting the image are a bit of a chicken and egg: if you knew where different parts of the image were, you wouldn’t have to segment them. Nevertheless, in practice, using algorithms that specifically focus on finding edges in the image can be useful to perform the segmentation. Finding edges in images has been an important part of computer vision for about as long as there has been a field called computer vision. Sophisticated edge detection algorithms can use this, together with a few more steps, to more robustly find edges that extend in space. One such algorithm is the Canny edge detector, named after its inventor, John Canny, a computer scientist, and computer vision researcher. The algorithm takes several steps that include smoothing the image to get rid of noisy or small parts, finding the local gradients of the image (for example, with the Sobel filter) and then thresholding this image, selecting edges that are connected to other strong edges and suppressing edges that are connected to weaker edges. 

### Registration

Another last major topic we will cover here is image registration. Image registration is something we do when we have two images that contain parts that should overlap with each other, but do not. For example, consider what happens when you take two photos of the same person. If your camera moves between the two photos, or the person moves between the two photos, their image will be in a slightly different part of the frame in each of the photos. Or, if you zoom closer between the photos, their face might take up more space in the photo. Other parts of the image that appear in the background might also be displaced. Let’s look at an example of this. We will load two photos taken in close succession. In between the two photos, both the camera and the object of the photos moved. This means that the two images look a little bit different.

The key is to identify a way to quantify how aligned the two images are to each other. Our visual systems are very good at identifying when two images are aligned, however, we need to create an alignment measure. These measures are often called cost functions. There are many different types of cost functions depending on the types of images that are being aligned. For example, a common cost function is called minimizing the sum of the squared differences and is similar to how regression lines are fit to minimize deviations from the observed data. This measure works best if the images are of the same type and have roughly equivalent signal intensities. The key is to identify a way to quantify how aligned the two images are to each other. Our visual systems are very good at identifying when two images are aligned, however, we need to create an alignment measure. These measures are often called cost functions. There are many different types of cost functions depending on the types of images that are being aligned. For example, a common cost function is called minimizing the sum of the squared differences and is similar to how regression lines are fit to minimize deviations from the observed data. This measure works best if the images are of the same type and have roughly equivalent signal intensities. Let’s create another interactive plot and find the optimal X & Y translation parameters that minimize the difference between a two-dimensional target image to a reference image.

#### Affine registration

The first kind of registration that we will talk about corrects for changes between the images that affect all of the content in the image. The fact that the person in the photo is in a different part of the frame, as are details of the background. In this case, these global changes are mostly affected by the motion of the camera between the two photos. In the case of brain imaging, a global change to the position of the brain is mostly related to the fact that the subject moved between the time in which each of the images was acquired. An affine registration can correct for global differences between images by applying a combination of transformations on the image: translating the entire image up or down, to the left or the right; rotating it clockwise or counter-clockwise, scaling the image (zooming in or out), and shearing the image. While most of these are straightforward to understand, the last one is a bit more complex: image shearing means that different parts of the image move to different degrees. In one example of a horizontal shear, the top row of pixels doesn’t move at all, the second row moves by some amount, the third row moves by that amount, and a small amount more, and so on. A larger amount of shear means that as we go down the image subsequent rows of pixels move by more and more.

#### Diffeomorphic registration

Global registration approach does well in registering the overall structure of one image to another, but it doesn’t necessarily capture differences in small details. Another family of registration algorithms registers different parts of the image separately. In principle, you can imagine that each pixel in the first image could independently move to any location in the second image. But using this unconstrained approach, in which you can move every pixel in one image to any location in the other image, you haven’t registered the images to each other, you’ve replaced them. Diffeomorphic registration is an approach that balances this flexibility with constraints. In principle, every pixel/voxel in the moving image could be moved to overlap with any pixel/voxel in the static image, but neighboring pixels/voxels are constrained to move by a similar amount. That is, the mapping between the moving and the static image varies smoothly in space. 




## Data science tools for neuroimaging

In previous posts, we discussed that data from neuroimaging experiments are arrays, computing with arrays tables and how to manipulate tabular data, scientific computing, and data visualization – were not specific to neuroimaging. Here, we will discuss data science approaches when they are tailored to neuroimaging data. First, we will present a survey of neuroimaging-specific software implemented in Python. Next, we will discuss some of the applications of these data science tools to fundamental problems in neuroimaging data analysis.

### Neuroimaging in Python

Within the broader ecosystem of Python tools for science, there is a family of tools specifically focused on neuroimaging (we will refer to them collectively as “NiPy”, which stands for “Neuroimaging in Python”). These software tools, developed by and for neuroimaging researchers, cover a wide range of data analysis tasks on a variety of different kinds of experimental data. In the next few sections, we will see in detail how some of these tools are used. But first, we will provide a broad survey of the different kinds of tools that currently exist. It is important to emphasize that this is a very dynamically evolving ecosystem, and some of these tools may evolve into other tools over time, or even disappear. New tools will inevitably also emerge. So, this survey will be, by necessity, a bit superficial and a bit dated. That said, we’ll try to give you a sense of how an ecosystem like this one emerges and evolves so that you can keep an eye on these trends as they play out in the future.


### Software Packages

There are different software packages to preprocess and analyze neuroimaging data. Most of them are open source and free to use. The most popular ones like SPM, FSL, & AFNI are well established and entail many new methods are developed and distributed. These packages have focused on implementing what they believe are the best statistical methods, ease of use, and computational efficiency. There are also many more niche packages that focus on specific types of preprocessing step and analyses such as spatial normalization with ANTs, connectivity analyses with the conn-toolbox, representational similarity analyses with the rsaToolbox, and prediction/classification with pyMVPA.

There has been a growing trend to adopt the open source Python framework in the data science and scientific computing communities, which has lead to an explosion in the number of new packages available for statistics, visualization, machine learning, and web development. There are many great tools that are being actively developed such as **nilearn, brainiak, neurosynth, nipype, fmriprep**, and many more. One exciting thing is that these newer developments have built on the expertise of decades of experience with imaging analyses, and leverage changes in high performance computing. There is also a very tight integration with many cutting edge developments in adjacent communities such as machine learning with scikit-learn, tensorflow, and pytorch, which has made new types of analyses much more accessible to the neuroimaging community. Here we focus on using many packages throughout the course such as PyBids to navigate neuroimaging datasets, fmriprep to perform preprocessing, and nltools, which is a package developed in my lab, to do basic data manipulation and analysis. NLtools is built using many other toolboxes such as nibabel and nilearn, and we will also be using these frequently throughout the course.

### Loading Data with Nibabel

The first step in almost any neuroimaging data analysis is reading neuroimaging data from files. All of the NiPy tools depend to some degree on the ability to read neuroimaging data from commonly used file formats into the memory of the computer. The tool of choice for doing that is called nibabel. The name hints at the plethora of different file formats that exist to represent and store neuroimaging data. Nibabel, which has been in continuous development since 2007, provides a relatively straightforward common route to read many of these formats. Scans are often stored in the format of nifti files .nii which can also be compressed using gzip .nii.gz. These files store both 3D and 4D data and also contain structured metadata in the image header. Many different file formats store neuroimaging data, but the NIfTI format (The acronym stands for Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative, which was the group at the US National Institutes of Health that originally designed the file format) has gained significant traction in recent years. For example, it is the format required by the BIDS standard for storing raw MRI data. Because this file format is so common, we will focus on this format here and we will not go into detail on the other file formats that are supported by nibabel.  nibabel objects can be initialized by simply pointing to a nifti file even if it is compressed through gzip. Getting acquainted with nibabel and its operations will also allow us to work through some issues that arise when analyzing data from neuroimaging experiments. 

### Nipype, the Python tool to unify them all

One of the main challenges for anyone doing neuroimaging data analysis is that different algorithms are implemented in different software libraries. Even if you decide that you would like to use NiPy tools for most of your data analysis, you might still find yourself needing to use non-Python tools for some steps in your analysis. For example, to use novel algorithms that are implemented in the popular FMRIB Software Library (FSL) or Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) frameworks for fMRI, or in FreeSurfer for analysis of structural MRI. In theory, if you wanted to construct an analysis pipeline that glues together operations from different frameworks, you would have to familiarize yourself with the varying ways in which these different frameworks expect their input data to appear and the varying ways in which they produce their output. The complexity can quickly become daunting. Moreover, creating reproducible data analysis programs that put together such pipelines becomes cumbersome and can be very difficult. Fortunately, these challenges have been addressed through the Nipype Python software library. Nipype implements Python interfaces to many neuroimaging software tools (including those we mentioned above). One of Nipype’s appealing features is that it provides a very similar programming interface across these different tools. In addition, it provides the functionality to represent pipelines of operations, where the outputs of one processing step become the inputs to the next processing steps. Running such a pipeline as one program is not only a matter of convenience but also important for reproducibility. By tracking and recording the set of operations that a dataset undergoes through analysis, as well as the parameters that are used in each step, Nipype allows users of the software to report exactly what they did with their data to come to a particular conclusion. In addition, Nipype allows a processing pipeline to be used with other datasets. 

## Preprocessing

Preprocessing is the term used to for all the steps taken to improve our data and prepare it for statistical analysis. A critical step before we can perform any analyses is to do our best to remove as much of the noise as possible. The series of steps to remove noise comprise our neuroimaging data preprocessing pipeline. In the procedure may correct or adjust our data for a number of things inherent in the experimental situation: to take account of time differences between acquiring each image slice, to correct for head movement during scanning, to detect ‘artifacts’ – anomalous measurements – that should be excluded from subsequent analysis; to align the functional images with the reference structural image, and to normalize the data into a standard space so that data can be compared among several subjects; to apply filtering to the image to increase the signal-to-noise ratio; finally, if sMRI is intended, a segmentation step may be performed. We will now look at each of those steps in more detail. 

We will cover:

+ Segmentation
+ Motion correction
+ Slice Timing Correction
+ Realignment
+ Coregistration
+ Spatial Normalization
+ Spatial Smoothing


#### Segmentation (sMRI)

Segmentation is the process by which a brain is divided into neurological sections according to a given template specification. This can be rather general, for example, segmenting the brain into gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid, as is done with SPM’s Segmentation, or quite detailed, segmenting into specific functional regions and their subregions, as is done with FreeSurfer’s recon-all, and that is illustrated in the figure. Segmentation can be used for different things. You can use the segmentation to aid the normalization process or use it to aid further analysis by using a specific segmentation as a mask or as the definition of a specific region of interest (ROI).

#### Motion Correction or Realignment (fMRI)

It is extremely important to make sure that a specific voxel has the same 3D coordinate across all time points to be able to model neural processes. This of course is made difficult by the fact that participants move during a scanning session and also in between runs. Motion correction, also known as Realignment, is used to correct for head movement during the acquisition of functional data. Even small head movements lead to unwanted variation in voxels and reduce the quality of your data. Motion correction tries to minimize the influence of movement on your data by aligning your data to a reference time volume. This reference time volume is usually the mean image of all timepoints, but it could also be the first, or some other, time point. Head movement can be characterized by six parameters: Three translation parameters which code movement in the directions of the three dimensional axes, movement along the X, Y, or Z axes; and three rotation parameters which code rotation about those axes, rotation centered on each of the X, Y, and Z axes). Motion correction tries to correct for smaller movements, but sometimes it’s best to just remove the images acquired during extreme rapid movement. We use Artifact Detection to identify the timepoints/images of the functional image that vary so much they should be excluded from further analysis and to label them so they are excluded from subsequent analyses. Motion correction usually uses an affine rigid body transformation to manipulate the data in those six parameters. That is, each image can be moved but not distorted to best align with all the other images. In the resting-state literature, where many analyses are based on functional connectivity, head motion can lead to spurious correlations. Some researchers choose to exclude any subject that moved more than certain amount. Other’s choose to remove the impact of these time points in their data through removing the volumes via scrubbing or modeling out the volume with a dummy code in the first level general linear models. 

#### Slice Timing Correction (fMRI)

Functional MRI measurement sequences don’t acquire every slice in a volume at the same time we have to account for the time differences among the slices. For example, if you acquire a volume with 37 slices in ascending order, and each slice is acquired every 50ms, there is a difference of 1.8s between the first and the last slice acquired. You must know the order in which the slices were acquired to be able to apply the proper correction. Slices are typically acquired in one of three methods: descending order (top-down); ascending order (bottom-up); or interleaved (acquire every other slice in each direction), where the interleaving may start at the top or the bottom. (Left: ascending, Right: interleaved). Slice Timing Correction is used to compensate for the time differences between the slice acquisitions by temporally interpolating the slices so that the resulting volume is close to equivalent to acquiring the whole brain image at a single time point. This temporal factor of acquisition especially has to be accounted for in fMRI models where timing is an important factor (e.g. for event related designs, where the type of stimulus changes from volume to volume).


#### Coregistration
Motion correction aligns all the images within a volume so they are ‘aligned’. Coregistration aligns the functional image with the reference structural image. If you think of the functional image as having been printed on tracing paper, coregistration moves that image around on the reference image until the alignment is at its best. In other words, coregistration tries to superimpose the functional image perfectly on the anatomical image. This allows further transformations of the anatomical image, such as normalization, to be directly applied to the functional image. The following picture shows an example of good (top) and bad (bottom) coregistration of functional images with the corresponding anatomical images. The red lines are the outline of the cortical folds of the anatomical image superimposed on the underlying greyscale functional image.

#### Normalization

Every person’s brain is slightly different from every other’s. Brains differ in size and shape. To compare the images of one person’s brain to another’s, the images must first be translated onto a common shape and size, which is called normalization. Normalization maps data from the individual subject-space it was measured in onto a reference-space. Once this step is completed, a group analysis or comparison among data can be performed. There are different ways to normalize data but it always includes a template and a source image.

The template image is the standard brain in reference-space onto which you want to map your data. This can be a Talairach-, MNI-, or SPM-template, or some other reference image you choose to use. The source image (normally a higher resolution structural image) is used to calculate the transformation matrix necessary to map the source image onto the template image. This transformation matrix is then used to map the rest of your images (functional and structural) into the reference-space.

There are several other preprocessing steps that involve image registration. The main one is called spatial normalization, in which each subject’s brain data is warped into a common stereotactic space. Talaraich is an older space, that has been subsumed by various standards developed by the Montreal Neurological Institute.

There are a variety of algorithms to warp subject data into stereotactic space. Linear 12 parameter affine transformation have been increasingly been replaced by more complicated nonlinear normalizations that have hundreds to thousands of parameters.

One nonlinear algorithm that has performed very well across comparison studies is diffeomorphic registration, which can also be inverted so that subject space can be transformed into stereotactic space and back to subject space. This is the core of the ANTs algorithm that is implemented in fmriprep. See this overview for more details.

Let’s watch another short video by Martin Lindquist and Tor Wager to learn more about the core preprocessing steps.

#### Spatial Smoothing
The last step we will cover in the preprocessing pipeline is spatial smoothing. This step involves applying a filter to the image, which removes high frequency spatial information. This step is identical to convolving a kernel to a 1-D signal that we covered in the Signal Processing Basics lab, but the kernel here is a 3-D Gaussian kernel. The amount of smoothing is determined by specifying the width of the distribution (i.e., the standard deviation) using the Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) parameter.

Why we would want to decrease our image resolution with spatial smoothing after we tried very hard to increase our resolution at the data acquisition stage? This is because this step may help increase the signal to noise ratio by reducing the impact of partial volume effects, residual anatomical differences following normalization, and other aliasing from applying spatial transformation.

Structural as well as functional images are smoothed by applying a filter to the image. Smoothing increases the signal to noise ratio of your data by filtering the highest frequencies from the frequency domain; that is, removing the smallest scale changes among voxels. That helps to make the larger scale changes more apparent. There is some inherent variability in functional location among individuals, and smoothing helps to reduce spatial differences between subjects and therefore aids comparing multiple subjects. The trade-off, of course, is that you lose resolution by smoothing. Keep in mind, though, that smoothing can cause regions that are functionally different to combine with each other. In such cases a surface based analysis with smoothing on the surface might be a better choice.

Smoothing is implemented by applying a 3D Gaussian kernel to the image, and the amount of smoothing is typically determined by its full width at half maximum (FWHM) parameter. As the name implies, FWHM is the width/diameter of the smoothing kernel at half of its height. Each voxel’s value is changed to the result of applying this smoothing kernel to its original value.

Choosing the size of the smoothing kernel also depends on your reason for smoothing. If you want to study a small region, a large kernel might smooth your data too much. The filter shouldn’t generally be larger than the activation you’re trying to detect. Thus, the amount of smoothing that you should use is determined partly by the question you want to answer. Some authors suggest using twice the voxel dimensions as a reasonable starting point.




### References
+ https://dartbrains.org/content/Introduction_to_Neuroimaging_Data.html#
+ https://dartbrains.org/content/Signal_Processing.html
+ https://dartbrains.org/content/Preprocessing.html
+ http://neuroimaging-data-science.org/content/005-nipy/001-nipy.html
+ https://miykael.github.io/nipype-beginner-s-guide/neuroimaging.html
