## Neuro-Imaging Data

Brain occupies space, so it is possible to collect data on how it fills space, also called volume data. All the volume data needed to create the complete, 3D image of the brain, recorded at one single timepoint is called a *volume*. The data is measured in voxels, which are like the pixels used to display images on your screen, only in 3D. Each voxel has a specific dimension, with it being the same dimension from all sides (isotropic). Each voxel contains one value which stands for the average signal measured at the given location. A standard anatomical volume, with an isotropic voxel resolution of 1mm contains almost 17 million voxels, which are arranged in a 3D matrix of 256 x 256 x 256 voxels. As the scanner can’t measure the whole volume at once it has to measure portions of the brain sequentially in time. This is done by measuring one plane of the brain (generally the horizontal one) after the other. The resolution of the measured volume data, therefore, depends on the in-plane resolution (the size of the squares in the above image), the number of slices and their thickness (how many layers), and any possible gaps between the layers. The quality of the measured data depends on the resolution and the following parameters:

+ Repetition time (TR): time required to scan one volume

+ Acquisition time (TA): time required to scan one slice. TA = TR - (TR/number of slices)

+ Field of View (FOV): defines the extent of a slice, e.g. 256mm x 256mm

### Specifics of MRI Data

MRI scanners output their neuroimaging data in DICOM, a common and standardized  raw medical image format which most analysis packages cannot work with. The most frequent format for newly generated data is called NIfTI. MRI data formats will have an image and a header part. For NifTI format, they are in the same file (.nii-file), whereas in the older Analyze format, they are in separate files (.img and .hdr-file). The image is the actual data and is represented by a 3D matrix that contains a value (e.g. gray value) for each voxel. The header contains information about the data like voxel dimension, voxel extend in each dimension, number of measured time points, a transformation matrix that places the 3D matrix from the image part in a 3D coordinate system, etc.

### Modalities of MRI Data

There are many different kinds of acquisition techniques. But the most common ones are structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).

#### sMRI (structural MRI)

Structural magnetic resonance imaging (sMRI) is a technique for measuring the anatomy of the brain. By measuring the amount of water at a given location, sMRI is capable of acquiring a detailed anatomical picture of our brain. This enables us to clearly distinguish between various tissue types, such as gray and white matter, where the white matter structures are visible in bright colors and the gray matter structures are observed in dark colors. High-resolution images of the brain's structure are utilized as reference images for a variety of processes, including segmentation, surface reconstruction, corregistration, and normalization. As the anatomy is not supposed to change while the person is in the scanner, a higher resolution can be used for recording anatomical images, with a voxel extent of 0.2 to 1.5mm, depending on the strength of the magnetic field in the scanner, e.g. 1.5T, 3T or 7T. 

#### fMRI (functional MRI)

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a technique for measuring brain activity by detecting the changes in blood oxygenation and blood flow that occur in response to neural activity. The brain requires a lot of energy to maintain its functioning, and as a region becomes more active, more oxygen, which is delivered by the blood, will be used locally. As a result, greater function causes more blood to flow to the area that uses the most energy. Due of the local energy expenditure following brain activity, there is an initial decline in blood oxygen levels. An increase in the flow of fresh, oxygen-rich blood in the direction of the area that needs the most energy occurs next. The blood oxygen level peaks after 4–6 seconds. The signal again falls and often undershoots until no more neural activation occurs before increasing once more to the baseline level. The blood oxygen level is exactly what we measure with fMRI. The MRI Scanner is able to measure the changes in the magnetic field caused by the difference in the magnetic susceptibility of oxygenated (diamagnetic) and deoxygenated (paramagnetic) blood. The signal is therefore called the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) response. Because the BOLD signal has to be measured quickly, the resolution of functional images is normally lower (2-4mm) than the resolution of structural images (0.5-1.5mm). But this depends strongly on the strength of the magnetic field in the scanner, e.g. 1.5T, 3T or 7T. In a functional image, the gray matter is seen as bright and the white matter as dark colors, which is the exact opposite to structural images.

##### **fMRI designs**

+ Event-related design
  + Event-related refers to the administration of brief stimuli to the individuals while they are being scanned. The stimuli are often given in random order and for very brief periods of time. The majority of the time, stimuli are visual, but they can also be audio or other reasonable stimuli. Hence, the BOLD response will consist of brief bursts of activity that will appear as peaks.

+ Block design
  + A block design occurs when several similar stimuli are presented in a block, or phase, of 10–30 seconds. With such a design, the BOLD signal peak is elevated for a longer time rather than just briefly, which results in a plateau on the graph. This facilitates the identification of an underlying activation rise.

+ Resting-state design
  + In the absence of stimulation, data is collected using resting-state approaches. In the scanner, subjects are instructed to stay still and rest without dozing off. Such a scan aims to capture brain activity when there is no external task being performed. This can be done to examine the functional connectivity of the brain on occasion.

#### dMRI (diffusion MRI)

Diffusion imaging is done to obtain information about the brain’s white matter connections. There are multiple modalities to record diffusion images, such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), diffusion spectrum imaging (DSI), diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and diffusion functional MRI (DfMRI). One can deduce information about the underlying structure of a voxel by observing the diffusion trajectory of the molecules (often water) within the voxel. For instance, in a voxel with largely horizontal fibre tracts, water molecules will primarily travel horizontally because they are prevented from moving vertically by the neural barrier. Diffusion can be measured in a variety of ways, including by mean diffusivity (MD), fractional anisotropy (FA), and tractography. Several insights into the neuronal fibre pathways of the brain can be gained from each measurement. As a relatively new area of MRI, diffusion MRI currently struggles to accurately detect fibre tracts and their underlying orientation. Visit the Diffusion MRI article on Wikipedia to learn more about this technique.

### Image processing

Images are the foundation of neuroimaging, and the majority of neuroimaging researchers use brain images as their primary source of information. Here, we'll provide a general overview of image processing so that you can gain an understanding of the kind of things you might consider while performing image processing in greater detail, such as picture segmentation and image registration. Even if you finally want to use specialised off-the-shelf software tools for these operations rather than creating them yourself, having a thorough understanding of these operations should still be beneficial to you. They are particularly prevalent in the analysis of neuroimaging data.

### Images are arrays

Numpy arrays can be used to represent neuroimaging objects. However, one feature that sets images apart from other types of data is the critical role that spatial relationships play in the understanding of images. This is so because adjacent areas of an image frequently depict objects that are situated close to one another in reality. These neighbourhood relationships should be used by image processing techniques. In contrast, there are times when these neighbourhood relationships impose limitations on the operations that can be performed on the images because we want to preserve these neighbourhood links despite subjecting the image to numerous transformations.

### Images can have two dimensions or more

We typically think of images as having two dimensions, because when we look at images, we are usually viewing them on a two-dimensional surface: on the screen of a computer or a page. Some images, however, have more than just two dimensions. For instance, we are typically interested in the complete three-dimensional representation of the brain when evaluating brain imaging. This implies that brain representations are typically three-dimensional, if not more. Once more, this is acceptable by our definition of an image. It is acceptable for spatial interactions to span more than two dimensions as long as they are significant and meaningful to the research.

### Image segmentation 

Here we are going to look at image segmentation. Image segmentation divides the pixels or voxels of an image into different groups. For example, you might divide a neuroimaging dataset into parts that contain the brain itself and parts that are non-brain (e.g., background, skull, etc.). Broadly speaking, segmenting an image enables us to identify the locations of various items and enables us to individually investigate portions of the image that include certain things of interest. We don't want to examine the voxels that include the subject's skull or the ventricles, for instance. We must divide the image into the brain and non-brain in order to be able to select only the voxels that are in the brain proper. There are several methods for solving this issue.

#### Intensity-based segmentation

Using the distribution of pixel intensities as a segmentation foundation is the first and most basic method of segmentation. The areas of the image that the brain occupies, for example, are brighter and have greater intensity values. The background-containing areas of the image are black and have low intensity levels. Using a histogram is one method of viewing the intensity levels in the image. To achieve this, just flatten the picture array's representation, which collapses the two-dimensional array into a one-dimensional array.

#### Otsu’s method

A classic approach to this problem is now known as “Otsu’s method”, after the Japanese engineer Nobuyuki Otsu, who invented it in the 1970s. The method relies on a straightforward principle: find a threshold that minimizes the variance in pixel intensities within each class of pixels (for example, brain and non-brain). This principle is based on the idea that pixels within each of these segments should be as similar as possible to each other, and as different as possible from the other segment. It also turns out that this is a very effective strategy for many other cases where you would like to separate the background from the foreground. This method is looking for a threshold that would minimize the total variance in pixel intensities within each class, or “intraclass variance”. This has two components: The first is the variance of pixel intensities in the background pixels, weighted by the proportion of the image that is in the background. The other is the variance of pixel intensities in the foreground, weighted by the proportion of pixels belonging to the foreground. To find this threshold value, Otsu’s method relies on the following procedure: Calculate the intraclass variance for every possible value of the threshold and find the candidate threshold that corresponds to the minimal intraclass variance. The foreground contribution to the intraclass variance is the variance of the intensities among the foreground pixels. The background contribution to the intraclass variance is the variance of the intensities in the background pixels, multiplied by the number of background pixels (with very similar code for each of these). The intraclass variance is the sum of these two. After running through several candidates, the value stored in the threshold variable will be the value of the candidate that corresponds to the smallest possible intraclass variance.

#### Edge-based segmentation

Threshold-based segmentation assumes that different parts of the image that should belong to different segments should have different distributions of pixel values. But this approach does not take advantage of the spatial layout of the image. Another approach to segmentation uses the fact that parts of the image that should belong to different segments are usually separated by edges. What is an edge? Usually, these are contiguous boundaries between parts of the image that look different from each other. These differences can be differences in intensity, but also differences in texture, pattern, and so on. In a sense, finding edges and segmenting the image are a bit of a chicken and egg: if you knew where different parts of the image were, you wouldn’t have to segment them. Nevertheless, in practice, using algorithms that specifically focus on finding edges in the image can be useful to perform the segmentation. Finding edges in images has been an important part of computer vision for about as long as there has been a field called computer vision. Sophisticated edge detection algorithms can use this, together with a few more steps, to more robustly find edges that extend in space. One such algorithm is the Canny edge detector, named after its inventor, John Canny, a computer scientist, and computer vision researcher. The algorithm takes several steps that include smoothing the image to get rid of noisy or small parts, finding the local gradients of the image (for example, with the Sobel filter) and then thresholding this image, selecting edges that are connected to other strong edges and suppressing edges that are connected to weaker edges. 

### Registration

Another major topic is image registration of two images that contain parts that should overlap with each other, but do not. The key is to identify a way to quantify how aligned the two images are to each other. To measure if two images are aligned it is necessary to create an alignment measure. These measures are often called cost functions. Depending on the sorts of images being aligned, there are numerous distinct cost function types. Similar to how regression lines are fitted to minimise departures from the observed data, one frequent cost function is known as minimising the sum of squared differences. The photos should be of the same type and have about equal signal intensities for this measurement to be effective. In order to reduce the disparity between a two-dimensional target image and a reference image, let's generate another interactive plot and identify the best X and Y translation parameters.

#### Affine registration

The first kind of registration that we will talk about corrects for changes between the images that affect all of the content in the image.  In the case of brain imaging, a global change to the position of the brain is mostly related to the fact that the subject moved between the time in which each of the images was acquired. An affine registration can correct for global differences between images by applying a combination of transformations on the image: translating the entire image up or down, to the left or the right; rotating it clockwise or counter-clockwise, scaling the image (zooming in or out), and shearing the image. While most of these are straightforward to understand, the last one is a bit more complex: image shearing means that different parts of the image move to different degrees. In one example of a horizontal shear, the top row of pixels doesn’t move at all, the second row moves by some amount, the third row moves by that amount, and a small amount more, and so on. A larger amount of shear means that as we go down the image subsequent rows of pixels move by more and more.

#### Diffeomorphic registration

Global registration approach does well in registering the overall structure of one image to another, but it doesn’t necessarily capture differences in small details. Another family of registration algorithms registers different parts of the image separately. In principle, you can imagine that each pixel in the first image could independently move to any location in the second image. But using this unconstrained approach, in which you can move every pixel in one image to any location in the other image, you haven’t registered the images to each other, you’ve replaced them. Diffeomorphic registration is an approach that balances this flexibility with constraints. In principle, every pixel/voxel in the moving image could be moved to overlap with any pixel/voxel in the static image, but neighboring pixels/voxels are constrained to move by a similar amount. That is, the mapping between the moving and the static image varies smoothly in space. 


### References
+ [Dartbrains](https://dartbrains.org)
+ [Neuroimaging-data-science](http://neuroimaging-data-science.org)
+ [Introduction to neuroimaging analysis](https://books.google.ca/books?hl=en&lr=&id=fGdRDwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PT24&dq=introduction+to+neuroimaging+data&ots=hkgw-DWnpE&sig=Xjj0aW4J2WyAnDO9qR07LaHfMTA#v=onepage&q=introduction%20to%20neuroimaging%20data&f=false)
