## Data science tools for neuroimaging

In previous post, we discussed that data from neuroimaging experiments are arrays and how scientific computing with arrays and data visualization were not specific to neuroimaging. Here, we will discuss data science tools tailored to neuroimaging data. First, we will present a survey of neuroimaging-specific software implemented in Python. Next, we will discuss some of the applications of these data science tools to fundamental problems in neuroimaging data analysis.

### Neuroimaging in Python

Within the broader ecosystem of Python tools for data science, there is a family of tools specifically focused on neuroimaging (we will refer to them collectively as “NiPy”, which stands for “Neuroimaging in Python”). These software tools, developed by and for neuroimaging researchers, cover a wide range of data analysis tasks on a variety of different kinds of experimental data. According to their Github page the aim of NiPy is to produce a platform-independent Python environment for the analysis of functional brain imaging data using an open development model.

+ Provide an open source, mixed language scientific programming environment suitable for rapid development.
+ Create software components in this environment to make it easy to develop tools for MRI, EEG, PET and other modalities.
+ Create and maintain a wide base of developers to contribute to this platform.
+ To maintain and develop this framework as a single, easily installable bundle.

Here, we'll give a thorough overview of the many tools that are available right now. This ecosystem is dynamically changing and that some of these technologies may eventually change or even vanish. Inevitably, new tools will also be developed. To help you keep an eye on these trends as they develop in the future, we'll try to give you a sense of how an ecosystem like this one forms and changes.


### Software Packages

There are different software packages to preprocess and analyze neuroimaging data. Most of them are open source and free to use. The most popular ones like SPM, FSL, & AFNI are well established and entail many new methods are developed and distributed. The implementation of the best statistical techniques, user friendliness, and computing effectiveness have been the main objectives of these programmes. There are also numerous other speciality packages that concentrate on particular preprocessing steps and analysis such as spatial normalization with ANTs, and connectivity analyses with the conn-toolbox. Also, there has been a surge in the number of new packages for statistics, visualisation, machine learning, and web development due to a growing trend in the data science and scientific computing communities to use the open source Python framework. There are many great tools that are being actively developed such as **nilearn, brainiak, neurosynth, nipype, fmriprep**, and many more. The neuroimaging community now has much easier access to new sorts of analysis thanks to the very tight integration with numerous cutting edge advances in neighbouring communities like machine learning using scikit-learn, tensorflow, and pytorch.

### Loading Data with Nibabel

The first step in almost any neuroimaging data analysis is reading neuroimaging data from files. All of the NiPy tools depend to some degree on the ability to read neuroimaging data from commonly used file formats into the memory of the computer. The tool of choice for doing that is called Nibabel. The name hints at the plethora of different file formats that exist to represent and store neuroimaging data. Nibabel, which has been in continuous development since 2007, provides a relatively straightforward common route to read many of these formats. Scans are often stored in the format of nifti files .nii which can also be compressed using gzip .nii.gz. These files store both 3D and 4D data and also contain structured metadata in the image header. Many different file formats store neuroimaging data, but the NIfTI format (The acronym stands for Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative, which was the group at the US National Institutes of Health that originally designed the file format) has gained significant traction in recent years. For example, it is the format required by the BIDS standard for storing raw MRI data. Because this file format is so common, we will focus on this format here and we will not go into detail on the other file formats that are supported by nibabel. Nibabel objects can be initialized by simply pointing to a nifti file even if it is compressed through gzip. Getting acquainted with Nibabel and its operations will also allow us to work through some issues that arise when analyzing data from neuroimaging experiments. NiBabel supports an ever growing collection of neuroimaging file formats. Every file format format has its own features and peculiarities that need to be taken care of to get the most out of it. To this end, NiBabel offers both high-level format-independent access to neuroimages, as well as an API with various levels of format-specific access to all available information in a particular file format.

### Nipype, the Python tool to unify them all

One of the main challenges for anyone doing neuroimaging data analysis is that different algorithms are implemented in different software libraries. Even if you decide that you would like to use NiPy tools for most of your data analysis, you might still find yourself needing to use non-Python tools for some steps in your analysis. For example, to use novel algorithms that are implemented in the popular FMRIB Software Library (FSL) or Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI) frameworks for fMRI, or in FreeSurfer for analysis of structural MRI. In theory, if you wanted to construct an analysis pipeline that glues together operations from different frameworks, you would have to familiarize yourself with the varying ways in which these different frameworks expect their input data to appear and the varying ways in which they produce their output. The complexity can quickly become daunting. Moreover, creating reproducible data analysis programs that put together such pipelines becomes cumbersome and can be very difficult. Fortunately, these challenges have been addressed through the Nipype Python software library. Nipype implements Python interfaces to many neuroimaging software tools (including those we mentioned above). Nipype, an open-source, community-developed initiative under the umbrella of NiPy, is a Python project that provides a uniform interface to existing neuroimaging software and facilitates interaction between these packages within a single workflow. Nipype provides an environment that encourages interactive exploration of algorithms from different packages (e.g., ANTS, SPM, FSL, FreeSurfer, Camino, MRtrix, MNE, AFNI, Slicer), eases the design of workflows within and between packages, and reduces the learning curve necessary to use different packages. Nipype is creating a collaborative platform for neuroimaging software development in a high-level language and addressing limitations of existing pipeline systems. One of Nipype’s appealing features is that it provides a very similar programming interface across these different tools. In addition, it provides the functionality to represent pipelines of operations, where the outputs of one processing step become the inputs to the next processing steps. Running such a pipeline as one program is not only a matter of convenience but also important for reproducibility. By tracking and recording the set of operations that a dataset undergoes through analysis, as well as the parameters that are used in each step, Nipype allows users of the software to report exactly what they did with their data to come to a particular conclusion. In addition, Nipype allows a processing pipeline to be used with other datasets. 

### References

+ [Nipy](https://nipy.org/)

+ [Nibabel](https://nipy.org/nibabel/gettingstarted.html) 

+ [Nipype](https://nipype.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
