---
layout: post
title: Publication
---


<li><p>Navarri, X., Afzali, M. H., Lavoie, J., Sinha, R., Stein, D. J., Momenan, R., … &amp; Conrod, P. J. (2022). How do substance use disorders compare to other psychiatric conditions on structural brain abnormalities? A cross‐disorder meta‐analytic comparison using the ENIGMA consortium findings. Human Brain Mapping, 43(1), 399-413.</p></li><li><p>Afzali, M. H., Dagher, A., Bourque, J., Spinney, S., &amp; Conrod, P. (2022). Cross-Lagged Relationships Between Depressive Symptoms and Altered Default Mode Network Connectivity Over the Course of Adolescence. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging.</p></li>
<li><p>Elkrief, L., Lin, B., Marchi, M., Afzali, M. H., Banaschewski, T., Bokde, A. L., … &amp; IMAGEN consortium. (2021). Independent contribution of polygenic risk for schizophrenia and cannabis use in predicting psychotic-like experiences in young adulthood: testing gene× environment moderation and mediation. Psychological Medicine, 1-11.</p></li>
<li><p>Stewart, S. H., Chinneck, A., Thompson, K., Afzali, M. H., Nogueira-Arjona, R., Mahu, I. T., &amp; Conrod, P. J. (2021). Personality to Prescription Drug Misuse in Adolescents: Testing Affect Regulation, Psychological Dysregulation, and Deviance Proneness Pathways. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 12, 474.</p></li>
<li><p>Noorbakhsh, S., Afzali, M., Conrod, P. (2020). Cognitive function impairments linked to alcohol and cannabis use during adolescence: A study of gender differences. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience</p></li>
<li><p>Banaha, N., Ghaeli. P., Afzali, M., Ghasemi, M., (2020).Effects of Celecoxib on electroconvulsive therapy-induced cognitive impairment in patients with major depressive disorder: a pilot, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Acta Medica Iranica.</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Stewart, S., Séguin, J., Conrod, P., (2020). The Network Constellation of Personality and Substance Use: Evolution from Early to Late Adolescence. European Journal of Personality.</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Dagher, A., Conrod, P., (2020). Adolescent Resting-State Brain Networks and Unique Variability of Conduct Problems within the Externalizing Dimension. Journal of Personality Disorders.</p></li>
<li><p>Perkins, E. R., Joyner, K. J., Patrick, C. J., Bartholow, B. D., Latzman, R. D., DeYoung, C. G., Kotov, R., Reininghaus, U., Cooper, S. E., Afzali, M., Docherty, A. R…, &amp; Zald, D. H. (2020). Neurobiology and the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology: Progress toward ontogenetically informed and clinically useful nosology. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience.</p></li>
<li><p>Boers, E., Afzali, M., Conrod, P. (2020). Temporal Associations of Screen Time and Anxiety Symptoms among Adolescents. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry. doi: 10.1177/0706743719885486.</p></li>
<li><p>Sunderland, M., Afzali, M., Batterham, P. J., Carragher, N., Calear, A., &amp; Slade, T. (2020). Examining differential item functioning of social interaction and performance fears in people with hazardous alcohol consumption and probable alcohol dependence. Addiction Research and Theory.</p></li>
<li><p>Boers, E., Afzali, M., Conrod, P. (2019). The Prospective Association between Screen Time and Depression in Adolescence: An Observational Cohort Study. JAMA Pediatrics. <a href="doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1759" class="uri">doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1759</a>.</p></li>
<li><p>Sunderland, M., Afzali, M., Batterham, P. J., Carragher, N., Calear, A., &amp; Slade, T. (2019). Comparing scores from full length, short form, and adaptive tests of the Social Interaction Anxiety and Social Phobia Scales. Assessment. doi: 10.1177/1073191119832657.</p></li>
<li><p>Edalati, H., Afzali, M., Conrod, P. (2019). The Effect of Contextual Risk Factors on the Effectiveness of Brief Personality-targeted Interventions for Adolescence Alcohol Misuse: A Cluster Randomised Trial. Alcoholism. doi: 10.1177/1073191119832657.</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Sunderland, M., Séguin, J., Teesson, M., Conrod, P., (2019) Machine Learning Prediction of Adolescent Alcohol Use. Addiction. doi: 10.1111/acer.14016.</p></li>
<li><p>Monfort, E., Tréhel, G. &amp; Afzali, M. (2018). XIV. Conséquences de la guerre d’Algérie sur la santé psychique des anciens combattants âgés : le rôle des ressources individuelles et sociales. Dans : éd., Guerre et Santé (pp.&nbsp;211-224). Paris: Hermann. <a href="https://doi.org/10.3917/herm.baech.2018.06.0211">https://doi.org/10.3917/herm.baech.2018.06.0211"</a></p></li>
<li><p>Conway, C. C., Forbes, M. K., Forbush, K. T., Fried, E. I., Hallquist, M. N., Kotov, R., Mullins-Sweatt, S. N., Shackman, A. J., Skodol, A. E., South, S. C., Sunderland, M., Waszczuk, M. A., Zald, D. H., Afzali, M. H., Bornovalova, ….D. B., Watson, D., &amp; Eaton, N. R. (2018). A hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology can transform mental health research. Manuscript accepted, Perspectives on Psychological Science. doi: 10.1177/1745691618810696.</p></li>
<li><p>Morin, JF, Afzali, M., Bourque, J, Stewart, SH, Séguin, J, O’Leary-Barrett, M, Conrod, P. (2018). Impact of early onset alcohol and cannabis use on adolescent cognitive development: a longitudinal, multi-level analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry. <a href="doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.18020202" class="uri">doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.18020202</a></p></li>
<li><p>Edalati, H., Afzali, M., Conrod, P. (2018). Poor response inhibition and peer victimisation: a neurocognitive ecophenotype of risk for adolescent interpersonal aggression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology. doi : 10.1037/abn0000380</p></li>
<li><p>Bourque, J., Afzali, M., &amp; Conrod, P. J. (2018). Association of Cannabis Use With Adolescent Psychotic Symptoms. JAMA Psychiatry. doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry. 2018.1330.</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Oleary-Barrett, M., Séguin, J., Conrod, P., (2018). Depressive Symptoms and the Evolution of Neuropsychological Functions over the Course of Adolescence. Journal of Affective Disorders, 229, 328-333.</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Sunderland, M., Carragher, N., Conrod, P., (2018). The Structure of Psychopathology in early Adolescence: Study of a Canadian Sample. Manuscript in press, The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 63(4),223-230.</p></li>
<li><p>Fourcade, C., Afzali, M., Kruck., J., Roge, B. (2017), Validation française du ‘’Caregiving Strain Questionnaire’’ sur une population de parents d’enfants avec Troubles du Spectre de l’Autisme. In press, Psychologie française.</p></li>
<li><p>Croiset, A., Ritz, P., Afzali, M.., Rogé, B., &amp; Sordes, F. (2017). Les déterminants psychosociaux de participation à l’ETP en amont d’une chirurgie bariatrique. Education Thérapeutique du Patient-Therapeutic Patient Education, 9(2), 20204</p></li>
<li><p>Werner-Seidler, A., Afzali, M., Sunderland, M., Chapman, C., Slade, T. (2017). The relationship between social support networks and depression in the 2007 National Survey of Mental Health and Well-being. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 52(12), 1463-1473.</p></li>
<li><p>Bourque, J. Afzali, M., Oleary-Barrett, M., Conrod, P. (2017). Cannabis use and psychotic-like experiences trajectory during early adolescence: the coevolution and potential mediators. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58(12), 1360-1369.</p></li>
<li><p>Monfort, E., &amp; Afzali, M., (2017). Traumatic stress symptoms after the November 13th 2015 Terrorist Attacks among Young Adults: The relation to media and emotion regulation. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 75, 68–74. <a href="doi:10.1016/" class="uri">doi:10.1016/</a> j.comppsych.2017.02.015</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Sunderland, M., Batterham, P. J., Carragher, N., Calear, A., &amp; Slade, T. (2017). Network approach to the symptom-level association between alcohol use disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 52(3), 329–339. <a href="doi:10.1007/s00127-016-1331-3" class="uri">doi:10.1007/s00127-016-1331-3</a></p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Sunderland, M., Teesson, M., Carragher, N., Mills, K., &amp; Slade, T. (2017). A network approach to the comorbidity between posttraumatic stress disorder and major depressive disorder: The role of overlapping symptoms. Journal of Affective Disorders, 208, 490–496. <a href="Doi:10.1016/j.jad.2016.10.037" class="uri">Doi:10.1016/j.jad.2016.10.037</a></p></li>
<li><p>Baduel, S., Guillon, Q., Afzali, M., Foudon, N., Kruck, J., &amp; Rogé, B. (2017). The French Version of the Modified-Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT): A Validation Study on a French Sample of 24 Month-Old Children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 47(2), 297–304. <a href="Doi:10.1007/s10803-016-2950-y" class="uri">Doi:10.1007/s10803-016-2950-y</a></p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Sunderland, M., Batterham, P. J., Carragher, N., &amp; Slade, T. (2016). Trauma characteristics, post-traumatic symptoms, psychiatric disorders and suicidal behaviours: Results from the 2007 Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing. Australian &amp; New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 1–10. <a href="Doi:10.1177/0004867416683815" class="uri">Doi:10.1177/0004867416683815</a></p></li>
<li><p>Dell’armi, M., Kruck, J., Afzali, M., &amp; Rogé, B. (2016). Adaptation et validation française du « Family Needs Questionnaire » : évaluation des besoins familiaux des parents d’enfants avec troubles du spectre de l’autisme. Journal de Thérapie Comportementale et Cognitive, 26(4), 150–161. <a href="Doi:10.1016/j.jtcc.2016.08.001" class="uri">Doi:10.1016/j.jtcc.2016.08.001</a></p></li>
<li><p>Cantisano, N., Rimé, B., Afzali, M. &amp; Muñoz-Sastre, M.T. (2016). Health outcomes resulting from the quality of emotional expression in HIV/AIDS. European Review of Applied Psychology. 66(3), 95–100. <a href="Doi:10.1016/j.erap.2016.04.009" class="uri">Doi:10.1016/j.erap.2016.04.009</a></p></li>
<li><p>Guillon, Q., Rogé, B., Afzali, M., Baduel, S., Kruck, J., &amp; Hadjikhani, N. (2016). Intact perception but abnormal orientation towards face-like objects in young children with ASD. Scientific Reports, 6, 22119. <a href="Doi:10.1038/srep22119" class="uri">Doi:10.1038/srep22119</a>.</p></li>
<li><p>Lacot, E., Afzali, M., &amp; Vautier, S. (2016). Test Validation Without Measurement: Disentangling Scientific Explanation of Item Responses and Justification of Focused Assessment Policies Based on Test Data. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 32(3), 204-214.</p></li>
<li><p>Afzali, M., Birmes, P., &amp; Vautier, S. (2015). Symptoms moderating the association between recent suicide attempts and trauma levels: fan-shaped effects. Death Studies, 39(10), 654–662. <a href="Doi:10.1080/07481187.2015.1047063" class="uri">Doi:10.1080/07481187.2015.1047063</a>.</p></li>
<li><p>Guillon, Q., Afzali, M., Rogé, B., Baduel, S., Kruck, J., &amp; Hadjikhani, N. (2015). The Importance of Networking in Autism Gaze Analysis. PLOS ONE, 10(10), e0141191. <a href="Doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0141191" class="uri">Doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0141191</a>.</p></li>
<li><p>Ghasemi, M., Kazemi, M. H., Yoosefi, A., Ghasemi, A., Paragomi, P., Amini, H., &amp; Afzali, M. (2014). Rapid antidepressant effects of repeated doses of ketamine compared with electroconvulsive therapy in hospitalized patients with major depressive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 215(2), 355–61. <a href="doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2013.12.008" class="uri">doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2013.12.008</a>.</p></li>
<li><p>Ahmadi, K., Lashani, Z., Afzali, M., Tavalaie, S. A., &amp; Mirzaee, J. (2013). Malingering and PTSD: detecting malingering and war related PTSD by Miller Forensic Assessment of Symptoms Test (M-FAST). BMC Psychiatry, 13, 154. <a href="doi:10.1186/1471-244X-13-154" class="uri">doi:10.1186/1471-244X-13-154</a>.</p></li>
<li><p>Ahmadi, K., Ashrafi, S. M. N., Ali Kimiae, S., &amp; Afzali, M. (2010). Effect of Family Problem-Solving on Marital Satisfaction. Journal of Applied Sciences, 10(8), 682–687. <a href="doi:10.3923/jas.2010.682.687" class="uri">doi:10.3923/jas.2010.682.687</a>.</p></li>
